.. -*- rst -*-

News - 1.2.x
============

.. _release-1-2-9:

Release 1.2.9 - 2011-12-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported Fedora 16.
* Dropped Fedora 15 support.
* [groonga] Improved the default server ID address to work
  on unresolved host name environment. [Reported by @uzulla]
* Supported MAP_HUGETLB.
* [admin] Supported throughput chart.
* Stopped adding nul character in ``grn_itoh()``. [#1194]
  [Reported by SHIDARA Yoji]
* Added ``grn_obj_get_values()``.
* Added ``grn_obj_delete_by_id()``.
* Supported string vector column for query expansion. [#1216]
* Added ``--filter`` option to :doc:`/reference/commands/delete` to delete
  many record at once. [#1225]
* Supported approximate type customization for
  :doc:`/reference/functions/geo_in_circle` and :doc:`/reference/functions/geo_distance`. [#1226]
* Made ``geo_distance2()`` and ``geo_distance3()`` are deprecated.
* Changed to use ``null`` instead of ``""`` for empty geo
  point value in JSON output.
* Almost supported MessagePack output. [#1215] [Worked by SHIDARA Yoji]
* Added missing newlines after drilldown result tags in XML output.
* Supported truncate for grn_dat.
* Supported longest common prefix search by grn_dat.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [windows] Fixed inverted map type.
* Fixed -Wno- compiler flag detection. [Patch by Arnaud Fontaine]
* Fixed a problem that ``groonga --version`` reports wrongly
  about MeCab. [#1209] [Patch by SHIDARA Yoji]
* Added missing lock into ``grn_obj_remove()``.
* Fixed Content-Type on error. [#1220] [Patch by SHIDARA Yoji]
* Fixed a problem that deleting SIS (Semi Infinite String)
  may keep a garbage.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @uzulla
* Arnaud Fontaine
* SHIDARA Yoji

.. _release-1-2-8:

Release 1.2.8 - 2011-11-29
--------------------------

Object, table and column renamings are supported! These
features require database re-creation. You can re-create your
database by the following command::

  % groonga YOUR_DB dump > db.dump
  % groonga -n YOUR_NEW_DB < db.dump

.. note::

   Groonga 1.2.8 can open databases created by groonga 1.2.7
   or earlier. But groonga 1.2.7 or earlier can't open
   databases created by groonga 1.2.8 or later.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [grntest] Removed the upper limit to the number of bytes in one line.
* [grntest] Added ``--pid-path`` option.
* [deb] Enabled experimental zlib and lzo support.
* [rpm] Enabled experimental zlib and lzo support.
* Supports truncation. [#892]
* Enabled grn_dat that is a read lock free double array implementation.
* [pkg-config] Added groonga_version variable to groonga.pc.
* Re-supported ``--disable-static``. [groonga-dev,00612]
  [Suggested by Kenichi Aramaki]
* [munin] Stopped to install Munin plugins by default.
* Stopped to install RedHat platform related files by default.
* Supports object renaming. This requires DB re-creation. [#1167]
* [munin] Added a Munin plugin that measures throughput. [#1171]
* [geo] Improved geo_in_rectangle performance. The new
  implementation will be 2x faster than the old
  implementation in many cases. [#1173]
* [macports] Moved groonga's MacPorts to the official
  repository. [Imported by Hiroshi Umemoto]
* [geo] Changed the geo literal degree-to-msec conversion algorithm
  to round-off from truncation.
* Supports a table defrag. It defrags variable size value columns in
  the table. [#1175]
* Removed associated path on remove. [#1180]
* [deb] Supports i386.
* [rpm] Supports i386.
* [windows] Supports x86.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a bug that groonga crashes when accessing a zlib/lzo compressed
  column. Note that a compressed column access causes a memory leak. To
  resolve this, we need to improve API. We will do it in the future.
  [GtiHub#5][GtiHub#6] [Reported by Takayuki Yamaguchi]
* Fixed a bug that unrelated column values are cleared in deletion.
* Fixed a bug that a wrong index is used in sorting. [#766]
  [Reported by Horikoshi Yuki]
* [libedit] Fixed a bug that necessary initialization is
  omitted. [GitHub#7] [Patch by SHIDARA Yoji]
* [doc] Fixed a typo in documentation. [GitHub#8] [Patch by zunda]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Takayuki Yamaguchi
* SHIDARA Yoji
* Horikoshi Yuki
* zunda
* Hiroshi Umemoto

.. _release-1-2-7:

Release 1.2.7 - 2011-10-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [libedit] Added error check for wide character to
  multibyte sequence conversion. [Reported by SHIDARA Yoji]
* Added grn_geo_estimate_in_rectangle().
* Added cursor API to geo search in rectangle.
* Improved geo search in rectangle speed.
* Added packages for Ubuntu 11.10 Oneiric Ocelot
* [experimental] Supported Oracle Solaris 10 8/11. (just buildable with system gcc.)

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a typo in document. [Reported by @soundkitchen]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* SHIDARA Yoji
* @soundkitchen

.. _release-1-2-6:

Release 1.2.6 - 2011-09-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Improved error message on type cast.
* Added geo point value validation on type cast.
* Supported :doc:`/tutorial/query_expansion`.
* Added `--query_expansion` option to
  :doc:`/reference/commands/select` for query expansion.
* Added geometry conversion macro between degree and msec.
* Supported type cast in :doc:`/reference/functions/geo_distance` ().
* Don't split tokens with full width space in command line. #986
* Supported conversion between TokyoGeoPoint and WGS84GeoPoint.
* Exported grn_geo_select_in_circle() and grn_geo_select_in_rectangle().
* Supported CentOS 6.
* Supported the current Debian GNU/Linux sid.
  Patch by SATOH Fumiyasu. GitHub#3

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a bug that geo point is loaded as broken value.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* SATOH Fumiyasu

.. _release-1-2-5:

Release 1.2.5 - 2011-08-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added experimental Windows installer support.
* Accepted "#" and "-" as a valid name characters. #1043
* Accepted all valid characters except "_" as the first character. #1043
* Supported `--each` for `[...]` form :doc:`/reference/commands/load`. #1044
* Added documentation for :doc:`/reference/suggest`.
* Supported threshold as `--frequency_threshold` and
  `--conditional_probability_threshold` options in all
  :doc:`/reference/commands/suggest` types. #1042
* [groonga-suggest-httpd] Supported log reopen by SIGUSR1. #1048
* Supported string input for reference vector column value. #1051
* [groonga-suggest-httpd] Added `--n-lines-per-log-file`
  option that changes log line limitation for a file.
* [groonga-suggest-httpd] Added `p` parameter for
  `--conditional_probability_threshold`.
* Added GRN_CTX_PER_DB flag for grn_ctx_init() and grn_ctx_open(). #1053
* Exported grn_ctx_close(). #1035

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a crash bug that invalid value is passed as match expression
  argument in :doc:`/reference/commands/select`. #1047
* Fixed a bug that hash table cursor returns garbage records.

.. _release-1-2-4:

Release 1.2.4 - 2011-07-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Re-supported ``*BSD``. (Reported by OBATA Akio)
* Improved sed related portability. (Suggested by OBATA Akio)
* Re-supported Visual C++ 2008.
* Supported :doc:`/reference/commands/check` for hash table.
* Ignored invalid _score in --sortby of :doc:`/reference/commands/select`
  for convenience. #1030
* Added document about :doc:`/reference/log`.
* Supported ~/.editrc.
* Supported ~/.groonga-history.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed broken libedit support. (Reported by Daiki Ueno)
* Fixed source URL in ``*.spec`` (Reported by Daiki Ueno)
* Fixed patricia trie cursor returns wrong records.
* Added missing database lock clear for grn_obj_clear_lock()
  for database.
* Fixed wrong record's column values deletion possible on
  record deletion.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* OBATA Akio
* Daiki Ueno

.. _release-1-2-3:

Release 1.2.3 - 2011-06-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added invalid table name check. #912
* Added groonga-query-log-analyzer that analyze query log.
* groonga command shows failed command on error.
* groonga command shows file name and line no on error.
* Improved error message of :doc:`/reference/commands/column_create`. #952
* Added GRN_OBJ_TABLE_DAT_KEY, double array trie, table. (experimental)

Fixes
^^^^^

* fix get command crash. (Reported by OBATA Akio)
* fix elapsed time overflow in query log. #944

Thanks
^^^^^^

* OBATA Akio

.. _release-1-2-2:

Release 1.2.2 - 2011-05-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added packages for Ubuntu 11.04 Natty Narwhal.
* Removed packages for Ubuntu 10.10 Maverick Meerkat.
* RPM: Split server related packages to groonga-server package.
* suggest: Added target object name into error messages.
* document: Started English support. (not completed yet.)
* groonga-suggest-httpd: Added --disable-max-fd-check option.
* groonga: Renamed :option:`groonga -a` and :option:`groonga
  --address` options to :option:`groonga --bind-address` option.
* groonga-suggest-httpd: Renamed --address option to --bind-address.
* Changed admin HTML install directory to
  $PREFIX/share/groonga/html/admin/ from
  $PREFIX/share/groonga/admin_html/.
* groonga-suggest-httpd: Used "application/json" for JSON response
  instead of "text/javascript".
* Windows: Used DLL relative path instead of executable file
  relative path.
* MeCab: Added error message from MeCab on MeCab initialize error.
* suggest: Added prefix_search parameter to suggest
  command. #909
* plugin: Added grn_plugin_get_system_plugins_dir() and
  grn_plugin_get_suffix() API.
* Added grn_obj_is_builtin() API.
* :doc:`/reference/commands/load`: Added table name check. #934
* Showed invalid name context in error message. #935

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a data breaking bug on multi process update. #890

1.2.1リリース - 2011-04-29
--------------------------

改良
^^^^

* suggestコマンドにthresholdパラメーターを追加。#895
* suggestのHTTPサーバにlimitパラメーターを追加。#899
* grntest: SIGINTでの中断に対応。

修正
^^^^

* 同時に複数のデータベースを開いているとき、1つでもデータベー
  スを閉じると関連するプラグインも閉じられてしまう問題を修正。 #894
* configureの--helpで出力される--with-deafult-encodingの値が
  間違っていた問題を修正。（ICHII Takashiさんが報告）
* チュートリアル中のtypoを修正。（moozさんが修正）

感謝
^^^^

* ICHII Takashiさん
* moozさん

1.2.0リリース - 2011-03-29
--------------------------

改良
^^^^

* MacPortsでのインストールドキュメントを追加。
* Homebrewでのインストールドキュメントを追加。
* WindowsではMinGWでもpthreadを使わないようにした。
* オーバーフローチェックを強化。
* 位置情報の入力値チェックを強化。
* インデックスを用いたジオサーチの例をチュートリアルに追加。 #438
* Debian GNU/Linux wheezyのパッケージを追加。
* Debian GNU/Linux lennyのパッケージを削除。
* Debianパッケージをcdbsベースからdebhelperベースへ移行。
  パッケージ名の変更あり。 #887
* MeCabトークナイザーの読み込みエラーを無視するようにした。た
  だし、ログには残る。 #893

修正
^^^^

* autoconf 2.59環境において、ファイルシステムのルート直下に
  groongaディレクトリを作成しようとする問題を修正。 #833
* JSONPが動作しなくなっていた問題を修正。
* MeCabトークナイザーの読み込みに失敗したときにクラッシュする問題を修正。
  （@tomotaka_itoさんが報告）
* [非互換] 位置情報の小数表記からミリ秒への変換誤差が大きい問題を修正。
* :doc:`/reference/functions/geo_in_rectangle` の ``top_left`` と
  ``bottom_right`` に同じ位置を指定するとクラッシュする問題を修正。
* メモリリークを修正。
* 小数形式のTimeリテラルをロードするとミリ秒情報が落ちる問題を修正。 #880
* :doc:`/reference/commands/column_list` のドキュメントを修正。 #758
* :doc:`/reference/commands/table_list` のドキュメントを修正。
* :doc:`/reference/commands/load` で_valueを指定するとメモリリークする問題を修正。 #878
* :doc:`/reference/commands/load` でクラッシュする問題を修正。 #661

実験的
^^^^^^

* grn_table_truncate()を追加。（実験的。問題あり）
* truncateコマンドを追加。（実験的。問題あり） #888

感謝
^^^^

* @tomotaka_itoさん
