.. -*- rst -*-

News - 1.3 series
=================

.. _release-1-3-0:

Release 1.3.0 - 2012-01-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported dynamic DB key table change by
  GRN_DB_KEY=pat or GRN_DB_KEY=dat environment variable value.
* Added ``--with-default-db-key`` configure option that
  specifies the default DB key table.
* Supported "" value for geo point data types. It's interpreted as "0x0".
* Added column name to cast error message.
* Inhibit file information for stdin on load error.
* Enabled write-strings warnings and suppress those
  warnings. [Suggested by montywi]
* Marked MessagePack output format as supported. [#1215]
* Added ``const`` to ``void *`` of ``*_set_value()``.
* Enabled warning flags on C and C++.
* Supported ``--with-libevent`` without value configure option.
* ``grn_table_get()`` supported grn_db. [#1242]
* [rpm] Removed needless groonga-munin-plugins dependency
  from groonga-server. [#1251] [Suggested by Masaharu IWAI]
* [rpm] Removed needless groonga-doc dependency
  from groonga. [#1251] [Suggested by Masaharu IWAI]
* [dat] Supported repair by ``grn_dat_repair()``.
* ``grn_table_at()`` supported grn_db.
* [suggest] Removed unstable mark.
* [suggest][complete] Supported normalized value search in prefix-search.
* Added experimental offline index build. It's disabled by
  default for now. You can enable it by
  USE_OFFLINE_INDEXER=yes environment variable.
* Added internal API ``grn_obj_path_by_id()`` for mroonga.
* [suggest][httpd] Passed unknown parameters to groonga.
* [output][xml] Added a newline before ``</RESULT>`` for readability.
* [doc][output] Added documentation about output format type.
* Added ``table_rename``. [#1234]
* Added ``column_rename``. [#1234]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* montywi
* Masaharu IWAI
