.. -*- rst -*-

News - 2.x
==========

.. _release-2-1-2:

Release 2.1.2 - 2013-01-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported multiple ``query()`` in a select command.
  For example, you can specify the keyword which has different weight such as
  'query("column * weight1", keyword1) || query("column * weight2", keyword2) || ...'
  for ``--filter``.
* Dropped experimental view feature.
* Added ``grn_logger_reopen`` API for custom logger.
  Note that ``grn_logger_info`` API is deprecated, use ``grn_logger`` API instead.
* Added ``grn_default_logger_set_path()`` and ``grn_default_logger_get_path()`` API.
  Note that global ``grn_log_path`` variable was removed. Use above API.
* Added ``grn_default_query_logger_set_path()`` and
  ``grn_default_query_logger_get_path()`` API.
  Note that global ``grn_qlog_path`` variable was removed. Use above API.
* Added translated documentation about :doc:`/reference/tables` and :doc:`/reference/normalizers`.
* [deb][rpm] Improved to install with missing dictionary when
  ``groonga-tokenizer-mecab`` package is installed.
* Supported :ref:`nested-index-search` with range search.
  For example, you can specify 'column1.column2...columnN <= "1988-01-04 00:00:00"'
  in ``--filter``.
* [rpm][fedora] Supported Fedora 18.
* [rpm][fedora] Dropped Fedora 17 support.
* [doc] Added documentation for :doc:`/server/package`.
* [doc] Added documentation for :doc:`/reference/functions/query`.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed not to report an error even though MeCab tokenizer shared object
  isn't found. [groonga-dev,01174] [Reported by wing]
* [httpd] Fixed not to fail configure on CentOS 5.4 by setting
  ``SED`` variable explicitly.
* Fixed a crash bug that not initialized vector column value is accessed
  by select command.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* wing

.. _release-2-1-1:

Release 2.1.1 - 2012-12-29
--------------------------

This is bug fix release of 2.1.0. All of 2.1.0 users should use 2.1.1
instead.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a bug that ``KEY_NORMALIZE`` information in database that is
  created by groonga 2.0.8 or ealier is dropped.

.. _release-2-1-0:

Release 2.1.0 - 2012-12-29
--------------------------

.. Caution::

   Use 2.1.1 instead of 2.1.0. 2.1.0 has a serious bug related
   ``KEY_NORMALIZE``.

.. Caution::

   This release has backward incompatible changes against ``table_list`` and
   ``column_list`` commands. If you use own program which depends on the output
   results above commands, you need to support null instead of "null" string.

   This release has supported ``--normalizer`` option, but there is
   side effect for this feature. If you open old version of groonga
   database at least once, you can not open its database by old
   version of groonga.

   There is also another backward incompatible change agaist plugin API for
   tokenizer. The argument of ``grn_tokenizer_query_open`` API has changed.
   This API change affects developer of tokenizer plugin.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [doc] Added documentation about :ref:`nested-index-search`.
* Supported the expression as :doc:`/reference/functions/snippet_html` arguments.
  This change enables you to use ``snippet_html("STRING" + "STRING")`` for example.
  You can specify column name or literal for "STRING". [Reported by Tomoatsu Shimada]
* Supported to create own normalizer as a plugin.
* Moved ``groonga-query-log-analyzer`` as
  `groonga-query-log <http://rubygems.org/gems/groonga-query-log>`_ RubyGems.
  It enables you to analyze query logs without installing groonga package.
* Supported ``--normalizer`` option for :doc:`/reference/commands/table_create` command.
  This change enables you to specify normalizer plugin.
* Changed "null" string to null value as meaning for "No Object".
  This is backward incompatible change and affects output results of introspection
  related commands such as ``table_list`` and ``column_list``.
* Added a flag which controls behavior about normalizer as the last argument
  of ``grn_tokenizer_query_open`` API.
* Supported continuous line in :ref:`command-list-with-continuous-line` list.
* Improved to support not only no key table, but also hash table, patricia trie
  and double array trie for :ref:`nested-index-search`.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [windows] Added missing ``O_BINARY`` flag to open file correctly.
  This change fixes the infinite loop problem about groonga HTTP server.
  [GitHub#47] [Patch by Shimomura Tatsuya]
* Fixed a bug that ``--default-match-escalation-threshold`` doesn't
  accept negative value to disable functionality that is used on
  :doc:`/spec/search`.  This fix enable you to disable search
  escalation.  see :option:`groonga
  --default-match-escalation-threshold` about details.
* Fixed a bug that ``_score`` after "*" is ignored in ``--output_columns``.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Tomoatsu Shimada
* Shimomura Tatsuya

.. _release-2-0-9:

Release 2.0.9 - 2012-11-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported to calculate the value of distance accross border
  in ``geo_distance`` with ``rectangle`` as approximate type. [#1534]
* [doc] Added the :doc:`/spec/gqtp` specification.
* Improved to ignore non critical ``getaddrinfo()`` error which groonga command emits on startup.
  This change does not affects nomal use of groonga because it just checked whether default hostname
  is resolved in previous version.
* [experimental] Added ``snippet_html()`` function which extract keyword and surrounding text.
  See :doc:`/reference/functions/snippet_html` about details.
* Supported to report error reason when error occured during reading table record.
* Supported to search with keyword by nested index notation ( concatinate multiple 
  indexed column name with dot character ) if there is a relationship between
  multiple table with index.
* Supported to log "[tokenizer][mecab]" tag when using ``TokenMecab`` tokenizer.
* Supported to log "[tokenizer][kytea]" tag when using ``TokenKyTea`` tokenizer.
* Improved to use separated array for command error location as output results.
  This change is incompatibility change, but does not affects existing program.
* Added documentation for :doc:`/reference/command/output_format`.
* Added documentation for :doc:`/reference/command/return_code` of output results.
* Supported range search by using index.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed to use network byte order for status code of :ref:`gqtp-header-spec` to follow
  the normal network protocol convention.
  This change affects that groonga <= 2.0.8 client which connects to groonga server 2.0.9
  or later can not show status code properly when command failed.
* Fixed a bug that UTF-8 normalization computes wrong offset which affects to return value
  of ``snippet_html()``. This change not to insert tag of snippet into invalid location.
  [#1531] [Reported by Tomoatsu Shimada]
* [windows] Fixed over allocated memory access which cause segmentation fault
  on startup by groonga command. [#1532] [Patch by Akio Tajima]
* [windows] Fixed a bug that data stored in column couldn't be read when total amount of data
  stored in column exceeds 128MB. [groonga-dev,01088] [Reported by ongaeshi]
* Fixed a bug that searching with indexed column for ``Int*`` and ``UInt*`` 
  except ``Int32/Uint32`` returns invalid results.
* Fixed a bug that deleting record can be found.
* Fixed a bug that latin1 and koi8r normalizations could not process all string data
  if given string contains NULL character on the way.
* Fixed to return the correct default value of type when no data stored in column is
  referenced by ``select`` command.
* Fixed to exclude the value of vector column metadata in :ref:`offline-index-construction`.
  This change not to contain such a metadata as search results.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Tomoatsu Shimada
* Akio Tajima
* ongaeshi


.. _release-2-0-8:

Release 2.0.8 - 2012-10-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [rpm] Improved the description of server-http and httpd packages.
  [Suggested by Daiki Ueno]
* Supported custom query expansion by plugin.
* [experimental] Added query expander ``QueryExpanderTSV`` plugin.
* Supported Ubuntu 12.10 Quantal Quetzal
* [experimental] Supported function call in ``output_columns``.
* [doc][rpm] Add missing description about installing MeCab dictionary.
  [Reported by serihiro]

Fixes
^^^^^

* [rpm] Fixed to remove needless "Requires" from spec file.
  [Reported by Daiki Ueno]
* [rpm] Fixed inaccurate description about license of groonga-server-gqtp.
* [admin] Fixed record edit button shows wrong record. [GitHub#34]
  [Reported by firewood]
* [deb] Fixed to remove needless dependency to pcre.
* [deb] Fixed to bundle missing table plugin.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Daiki Ueno
* firewood
* serihiro

.. _release-2-0-7:

Release 2.0.7 - 2012-09-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [doc] Added more descriptions about ``--query_flags``.
* [doc][httpd] Added sample configuration for gzip compression.
* [httpd][rpm][centos] Added groonga-httpd init script.
* [rpm] Added logrotate config files.
* Supported creating database during install process.
* [httpd] Supported ``groonga_database_auto_create`` directive.
* Supported score respected merge by set operation. [GitHub#31]
* [httpd] Supported ``load`` command by POST.
* Added error check for creating temporary result set. [GitHub#33]
* Added GQTP server package.
* Added ``max()`` function.
* Added ``min()`` function.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed to set domain to vector elements to ``load`` command. [GitHub#30]
* [httpd] Fixed missing NULL initialization. [Reported by @Kiske]
* [httpd] Fixed missing size about ``content_type_len``.
* [rpm][fedora] Fixed to use ``--bind-address`` in ``groonga.service``.
* Fixed crash by invalid argument filter. [GitHub#32]
* Fixed a bug that Time -> Time cast breaks value.
* Fixed a bug that Time -> Float cast breaks value.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @Kiske

.. _release-2-0-6:

Release 2.0.6 - 2012-08-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [deb][rpm] Added ``groonga-server-common`` meta package. [#1451]
* Supported ``--query_flags`` option to ``select`` command.
* Supported PCRE auto detection for groonga-httpd.
* [doc] Added information about Twitter and Facebook.
* Improved to show error message from MeCab on ``mecab_new2()`` failure.
* [doc] Added details about groonga for server use.
* Improved to log details about ``vm.overcommit_memory``.
* Supported custom selector definition.
* Supported ``--working-directory`` option for groonga.
* Supported ``dump`` command for groonga-httpd.
* Improved to show not found target name for ``clearlock`` command.
* Improved error messages about ``get`` command implemented by table plugin.
* [rpm][centos] Supported MeCab 0.994. [#1455]
  [Suggested by IWAI, Masaharu]
* Supported changing default logger's max level before ``grn_init()``.
* Added ``all_records()`` function which copies all record IDs to the result table.
* Supported '-WORD' in ``--query`` of the select command.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [doc] Fixed the execution examples. [#1428]
  [Reported by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [deb] Fixed not to force groonga user/group by init script for groonga-httpd.
* [rpm][fedora] Fixed missing stop parameter for groonga-httpd service.
* Fixed a bug that the last 1 byte for cache key is ignored by ``select`` command.
* Fixed detection of the number of arguments in the complex function call.
* Fixed to suppress a warning by Clang.
* Fixed backward incompatibility about missing ``add`` command related error
  by executing ``clearlock`` command.
* [windows] Fixed database open failure which is related to binary data.
  [Reported by @yito]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* IWAI, Masaharu
* @yito


.. _release-2-0-5:

Release 2.0.5 - 2012-07-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported calculating the value of distance with "rect" or "rectangle"
  argument in southern hemisphere. [#1418] [#1419] [#1420] [#1421]
* [doc] Added some literals description in script syntax.
* Supported other directory build for groonga-suggest and groonga-httpd.
* Supported ";" as a query parameter separator. [#1406]
  [Suggested by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [doc] Added descriptions about script syntax.
* Supported near search by ``'column *N "word1 word2 ..."'`` in script syntax.
  [#1423]
* [doc] Added a description about limitation of suffix search.
* Supported near search for ``_key`` pseudo column. [GitHub#19]
* [doc] Added basic ECMAScript related syntaxes.
* [doc] Updated a description about :doc:`/reference/functions/geo_distance`.
* [rpm][fedora] Supported Fedora 17.
* [rpm][fedora] Dropped Fedora 16 support.
* Supported logical not ``"!"`` operator. [GitHub#22]
* [httpd] Supported per location groonga database.
* Improved to return error messages while load command is processing.
* Improved to exit load command when an uncontinuable error occurred.
* Improved to stop load command for invalid --columns value.
* Supported to open locked database. [GitHub#21]

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a build problem about groonga-httpd on Mac OS X.
  [Reported by SHIMADA Koji]
* Fixed not to use installed groonga's header files for groonga-httpd.
* Fixed a build problem about groonga on Mac OS X Lion.
* [doc] Fixed a description of :doc:`/reference/commands/table_remove` command.
* Fixed infinite loop problem for not implemented operator without index.
  [GitHub#20]
* Fixed a wrong error code which causes memory leaks.
* Fixed a wrong error code which collapse ja columns.
* [admin] Fixed to escape error message.
* Fixed to ignore unloadable objects which causes database incompatible.
  [#1429] [Reported by IWAI, Masaharu]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* SHIMADA Koji
* IWAI, Masaharu


.. _release-2-0-4:

Release 2.0.4 - 2012-06-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported only KyTea 0.4.2.
* Dropped KyTea 0.4.1 or ealier support.
* [experimental] Supported nginx based groonga HTTP interface.
* Supported calculating the value of distance with "rect" or "rectangle"
  argument in northern hemisphere. [#1386] [#1387] [#1388] [#1389]
* [doc] Added a document about :doc:`/development/travis-ci` integration.
* [doc] Added descriptions about full text search and phrase search.
  See :ref:`query-syntax-full-text-search-condition` and
  :ref:`query-syntax-phrase-search-condition` about detail.
* [doc] Added descriptions about comparison conditions.  See
  :ref:`query-syntax-conditional-expression` about detail.
* [doc] Added examples for :doc:`/reference/grn_expr/query_syntax`.
* [doc] Added descriptions about
  :ref:`query-syntax-combined-expression`.
* [doc] Added descriptions about
  :ref:`query-syntax-prefix-search-condition` and
  :ref:`query-syntax-suffix-search-condition`.
* Supported suffix search by index.
* [doc] Added a document about :doc:`/reference/grn_expr`.
* [munin] Supported JSON library installed by RubyGems [GitHub#17]
  [Patch by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [doc] Updated the description of how to specify a value as Time in tutorial.
  [#1405] [Reported by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [rpm] Removed groonga-tokenizer-mecab dependency from groonga package.
  [GitHub#18] [Patch by IWAI, Masaharu]

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a problem that display of command prompt changes to not intended state
  by using batch mode on Mac OS X.
  [Reported by @soundkitchen]
* Fixed not to terminate after an invalid command in client mode. [#1305]
* Fixed a problem that '=R' is treated as 'OR' in ``--query`` syntax. [#1393]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @soundkitchen
* IWAI, Masaharu

.. _release-2-0-3:

Release 2.0.3 - 2012-05-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [doc] Added about release procedure.
* Removed restriction that the max number of opened files is 4096.
* [experimental] Added table plugin.
* [doc] Added more descriptions about :doc:`/reference/commands/select` command.
* [doc] Made execution example copy & paste friendly.
* [windows] Supported build with Visual Studio 2010 Express and
  CMake. See :doc:`/install/windows` about details.
* [doc][solaris] Added a document about building on Solaris.
  See :doc:`/install/solaris` about details.
* [doc][yum] Updated epel-release package version.
  [Reported by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [doc][cenos6] Disabled Repoforge for Munin for CentOS 6.
  [Reported by IWAI, Masaharu]
* Started distributing source archive in zip format.
* [munin] groonga_dist Munin plugin supported an object that has
  separated files.
* Started using Travis CI.
* [yum] Changed RPM package name that provides yum repository from
  groonga-repository to groonga-release to follow RPM package name
  convension such as centos-release and fedora-release.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [doc] Fixed a command to update yum repository.
  [Suggested by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [deb] Fixed a bug that log_repoen command in logrotate uses wrong protocol.
* Fixed broken ERROR tag in XML response.
  [#1363] [GitHub#13] [Patch by IWAI, Masaharu]
* Fixed a bug that grn_ctx isn't fully cleared by grn_ctx_fin().
* Fixed a bug that ``&!`` set operation doesn't work with grouped
  expression. [#1372]
* Fixed a bug that a record key registered via index source isn't normalized.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* IWAI, Masaharu

.. _release-2-0-2:

Release 2.0.2 - 2012-04-29
--------------------------

.. caution::

   The package sign key is changed since this release. Import the new
   package sign key before updating groonga packages.

   Debian/Ubuntu::

     % sudo apt-get update
     % sudo apt-get -y --allow-unauthenticated install groonga-keyring

   CentOS/Fedora::

     % sudo yum makecache
     % sudo yum install --nogpgcheck -y groonga-repository

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [pkg-config] Removed needless MessagePack dependency.
* [rpm][fedora] Supported libedit. [#1325] [Suggested by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [rpm] Supported zlib and LZO. [#1324] [Patch by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [groonga] Improved daemoinzed timing. Groonga server daemonizes
  after socket is listened. It means that groonga server is ready when
  groonga server is daemonized. [#1326]
* [admin] Supported suggest in groonga administration page.
* [dump] Ignored MeCab tokenizer load error.
* Supported CMake.
* [load] Supported error report when a column value can't be set.
* Supported similar search. ``select --filter "column *S 'TEXT'"``
  is the similar search syntax. [#1342]
* [apt][yum] Changed package sign key.
* Supported Ubuntu Precise Pangolin.
* [apt] Added a new groonga-keyring deb package for the groonga's
  package sign key.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [deb][rpm] Used ``--bind-address`` option instead of deprecated
  ``--address`` option.
  [#1320] [Patch by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [deb] Renamed groonga-server package's configuration file to
  /etc/default/groonga-server from /etc/default/groonga.
* [rpm][fedora] Fixed upgrade condition in %post server.
  [GitHub#11] [Patch by Daiki Ueno]
* [rpm] Removed needless change logs. [#1328] [Patch by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [deb][rpm] Added missing curl dependency.
  [GitHub#12] [Patch by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [rpm] Removed needleess ruby package dependency from groonga package.
  [#1330] [Suggested by IWAI, Masaharu]
* [deb] Added missing default values to groonga-server's
  configuration file.
* Fixed a crash bug that is caused when searching with updaging very large
  inverted index. [#1329]
* Fixed a bug that strings are compared as characters instead of byte string.
  [#1340] [Reported by Shinya Kawaji]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* IWAI, Masaharu
* Daiki Ueno
* Shinya Kawaji

.. _release-2-0-1:

Release 2.0.1 - 2012-03-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported build in other directory.
  [#1298] [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* [solaris] Supported build on Solaris 11. [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* [test] Supported functional test.
* [test] Required ``--with-ruby19`` configure option for testing by Ruby.
* [dump] Supported records dump for a table that has default tokenizer.
* [suggest] Added ``similar_search`` option.
* [groonga] Removed deprecated options, ``-a``, ``--address`` and
  ``--admin-html-path``.
* Added more return value checks. [GitHub#9] [Reported by Markus Elfring]
* [dat] Supported term extract operation.
* Added `logos <http://groonga.org/logo/>`_ .
* Updated HTML design.
* Renamed ``grntest`` to ``groonga-benchmark``.
* Supported ``autogen.sh`` on CentOS 5.
* [linux] Added ``vm.overcommit_memory`` kernel parameter value
  check. [#1289]
* ``grn_snip`` uses ``grn_obj`` mechanism. [#1054]

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a bug that uninstall task doesn't uninstall installed Ruby
  scripts. [#1299] [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* Added a missing Gemfile. [#1302] [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* Fixed a bug that some indexed records aren't found. The feature is
  only used by mroonga. [#1303]
* [groonga] Appended missing ``-id`` to ``--server-id`` option name.
* Fixed a bug that latin1 normalization may access unexpected memory.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Kazuhiko
* Markus Elfring

.. _release-2-0-0:

Release 2.0.0 - 2012-02-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [dat] Added 0 length key check.
* [windows] Added missing GCC related DLLs. [groonga-dev,00686]
  [Reported by Suzuki]
* [php] Supported PHP 5.4. [Patch by Daiki Ueno]
* Updated FSF address. [Suggested by Daiki Ueno]
* [fedora] Supported systemd. [Patch by Daiki Ueno]
* [rpm][debian] Changed the default protocol to HTTP from gqtp.
* [rpm][centos] Supported status command.
* Removed needless ``:`` from log message.
* Removed deprecated grn_query. [#1247]
* Reduced needless grn_ctx_at() calls on creating table.
* [pat] Supported cache.
* [tokenizer] Improved tokenizer API.
* Accepted ``@`` as a valid name character.
* [tokenizer] Added a tokenizer based on
  `KyTea <http://www.phontron.com/kytea/>`_.
* Supported :doc:`offline index construction </reference/indexing>`.
* [tokenizer] Supported MeCab 0.993. [groonga-dev,00703]
  [Reported by Masaharu YOSHIOKA]
* [windows] Supported MessagePack.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [pat] Fixed a bug that the last node can't be found. [#1258]
* [doc] Fixed links in Japanese page. [Reported by @naoina]
* [doc] Fixed wrong the default value. [Reported by @naoina]
* Fixed a typo. [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* [http] Fixed a bug that ``load`` command error isn't cleared.
  [Reported by @wareohji]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Suzuki
* Daiki Ueno
* @naoina
* Kazuhiko
* Masaharu YOSHIOKA
* @wareohji
