News - 8 series
===============

.. _release-8-1-1:

Release 8.1.1 - 2019-01-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/logical_select`] Added new argument ``--load_table``, ``--load_columns`` and ``--load_values``.

  * You can store a result of ``logical_select`` in a table that specifying ``--load_table``.

  * ``--load_values`` option specifies columns of result of ``logical_select``.

  * ``--load_columns`` options specifies columns of table that specifying ``--load_table``.

  * In this way, you can store values of columns that specifying with ``--load_values`` into columns that specifying with ``--load_columns``.

* Improve error log when update error of index.

  * Added more information in the log.

    * For example, output source buffer and chunk when occur merge of posting lists error.
    * Also, outputting the log a free space size of a buffer and request size of a buffer when occurs error of allocating a buffer.

* [:doc:`/reference/executables/groonga`] Added a new option ``--log-flags``.

  * We can specify output items of a log of the Groonga.

  * We can output as below items.

    * Timestamp
    * Log message
    * Location(the location where the log was output)
    * Process id
    * Thread id

  * We can specify prefix as below.

    * ``+``

      * This prefix means that "add the flag".

    * ``-``

      * This prefix means that "remove the flag".

    * No prefix means that "replace existing flags".

  * Specifically, we can specify flags as below.

    * ``none``

      * Output nothing into the log.

    * ``time``

      * Output a timestamp into the log.

    * ``message``

      * Output log messages into the log.

    * ``location``

      * Output the location where the log was output( a file name, a line and a function name) and process id.

    * ``process_id``

      * Output a process id into the log.

    * ``pid``

      * This flag is an alias of ``process_id``.

    * ``thread_id``

      * Output thread id into the log.

    * ``all``

      * This flag specifies all flags except ``none`` and ``default`` flags.

    * ``default``

      * Output a timestamp and log messages into the log.

  * We can also specify multiple log flags by separating flags with ``|``.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a memory leak when occurs index update error.

* [:doc:`/reference/normalizers`] Fixed a bug that stateless normalizers and stateful normalizers return wrong results when we use them at the same time.

    * Stateless normalizers are below.

      * ``unify_kana``
      * ``unify_kana_case``
      * ``unify_kana_voiced_sound_mark``
      * ``unify_hyphen``
      * ``unify_prolonged_sound_mark``
      * ``unify_hyphen_and_prolonged_sound_mark``
      * ``unify_middle_dot``

    * Stateful normalizers are below.

      * ``unify_katakana_v_sounds``
      * ``unify_katakana_bu_sound``
      * ``unify_to_romaji``

.. _release-8-1-0:

Release 8.1.0 - 2018-12-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [httpd] Updated bundled nginx to 1.15.8.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a bug that unlock against DB is always executed after flush when after execute a ``io_flush`` command.

* Fixed a bug that ``reindex`` command doesn't finish when execute a ``reindex`` command against table that has record that has not references.

.. _release-8-0-9:

Release 8.0.9 - 2018-11-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`] Improved that output a tokenizer name in error message when create tokenizer fail.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenDelimit] Supported that customizing delimiter of a token.

  * You can use token other than whitespace as a token of delimiter.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenDelimit] Added new option ``pattern``.

  * You can specify delimiter with regular expression by this option.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`] Added force_prefix_search value to each token information.

  * "force_prefix" is kept for backward compatibility.

* [:doc:`/reference/token_filters`] Added built-in token filter ``TokenFilterNFKC100``.

  * You can convert katakana to hiragana like NormalizerNFKC100 with a ``unify_kana`` option.

* [:doc:`/reference/token_filters`][TokenFilterStem] Added new option ``algorithm``.

  * You can also stem language other than English(French, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Romanian, German, Dutch, Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, Russian, Finnish) by this option.

* [:doc:`/reference/token_filters`][TokenFilterStopWord] Added new option ``column``.

  * You can specify stop word in a column other than is_stop_word column by this option.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/dump`] Supported output options of token filter options.

  * If you specify a tokenizer like ``TokenNgram`` or ``TokenMecab`` etc that has options, you can output these options with ``table_list`` command.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/truncate`] Supported a table that it has token filter option.

  * You can ``truncate`` even a tabel that it has token filter like ``TokenFilterStem`` or ``TokenStopWord`` that has options.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/schema`] Support output of options of token filter.

* [:doc:`/reference/normalizers`] Added new option for ``NormalizerNFKC100`` that ``unify_to_romaji`` option.

  * You can normalize hiragana and katakana to romaji by this option.

* [query-log][show-condition] Supported "func() > 0" case.

* [Windows] Improved that ensure flushing on unmap.

* Improved error message on opening input file error.

* [httpd] Updated bundled nginx to 1.15.7.

  * contains security fix for CVE-2018-16843 and CVE-2018-16844.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a memory leak when evaluating window function.

* [:doc:`/reference/executables/groonga-httpd`] Fixed bug that log content may be mixed.

* Fixed a bug that generates invalid JSON when occurs error of slice on output_columns.

* Fixed a memory leak when getting nested reference vector column value.

* Fixed a crash bug when outputting warning logs of index corruption.

* Fix a crash bug when temporary vector is reused in expression evaluation.

  * For example, crash when evaluating an expression that uses a vector as below.

  ``_score = _score + (vector_size(categories) > 0)``

* Fix a bug that hits a value of vector columns deleted by a delete command.[GitHub PGroonga#85][Reported by dodaisuke]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* dodaisuke

.. _release-8-0-8:

Release 8.0.8 - 2018-10-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/table_list`] Supported output options of default tokenizer.

  * If you specify a tokenizer like ``TokenNgram`` or ``TokenMecab`` etc that has options, you can output these options with ``table_list`` command.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/select`] Supported normalizer options in sequential match with ``record @ 'query'``.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/truncate`] Supported a table that it has tokenizer option.

  * You can ``truncate`` even a tabel that it has tokenizer like ``TokenNgram`` or ``TokenMecab`` etc that has options.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenMecab] Added new option ``target_class``

  * This option searches a token of specifying a part-of-speech. For example, you can search only a noun.
  * This option can also specify subclasses and exclude or add specific part-of-speech of specific using ``+`` or ``-``. So, you can also search except a pronoun as below.

    ``'TokenMecab("target_class", "-名詞/代名詞", "target_class", "+")'``

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/io_flush`] Supported locking of a database during a ``io_flush``.

  * Because Groonga had a problem taht is a crash when deleteing a table of a target of a ``io_flush`` during execution of a ``io_flush``.

* [:doc:`/reference/functions/cast_loose`] Added a new function ``cast_loose``.

  * This function cast to a type to specify. If a value to specify can't cast, it become to a default value to specify.

* Added optimize the order of evaluation of a conditional expression.(experimental)

  * You can active this feature by setting environment value as below.

    ``GRN_EXPR_OPTIMIZE=yes``

* Supported ``(?-mix:XXX)`` form for index searchable regular expression. [groonga-dev,04683][Reported by Masatoshi SEKI]

  * ``(?-mix:XXX)`` form treats the same as XXX.

* [httpd] Updated bundled nginx to 1.15.5.

* Supported Ubuntu 18.10 (Cosmic Cuttlefish)

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a bug that the Groonga GQTP server may fail to accept a new connection. [groonga-dev,04688][Reported by Yutaro Shimamura]

  * It's caused when interruption client process without using quit.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Masatoshi SEKI
* Yutaro Shimamura

.. _release-8-0-7:

Release 8.0.7 - 2018-09-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenMecab] support outputting metadata of Mecab.

  * Added new option ``include_class`` for ``TokenMecab``.

    This option outputs ``class`` and ``subclass`` in Mecab's metadata.

  * Added new option ``include_reading`` for ``TokenMecab``.

    This option outputs ``reading`` in Mecab's metadata.

  * Added new option ``include_form`` for ``TokenMecab``.

    This option outputs ``inflected_type``, ``inflected_form`` and ``base_form`` in Mecab's metadata.

  * Added new option ``use_reading`` for ``TokenMecab``.

    This option supports a search by kana.

    This option is useful for countermeasure of orthographical variants because it searches with kana.

* [plugin] Groonga now can grab plugins from multiple directories.

  You can specify multiple directories to ``GRN_PLUGINS_PATH`` separated with ":" on non Windows, ";" on Windows.

  ``GRN_PLUGINS_PATH`` has high priority than the existing ``GRN_PLUGINS_DIR``.
  Currently, this option is not supported Windows.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenNgram] Added new option ``unify_alphabet`` for ``TokenNgram``.

  If we use ``unify_alphabet`` as ``false``, ``TokenNgram`` uses bigram tokenize method for ASCII character.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenNgram] Added new option ``unify_symbol`` for ``TokenNgram``.

  ``TokenNgram("unify_symbol", false)`` is same behavior of ``TokenBigramSplitSymbol``.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenNgram] Added new option ``unify_digit`` for ``TokenNgram``.

  If we use ``unify_digit`` as ``false``, If we set false, ``TokenNgram`` uses bigram tokenize method for digits.

* [httpd] Updated bundled nginx to 1.15.4.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed wrong score calculations on some cases.

  * It's caused when adding, multiplication or division numeric to a bool value.
  * It's caused when comparing a scalar and vector columns using ``!=`` or ``==``.

.. _release-8-0-6:

Release 8.0.6 - 2018-08-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenMecab] add ``chunked_tokenize`` and ``chunk_size_threshold`` options.

* [optimizer] support estimation for query family expressions.
  It will generate more effective execution plan with query family expressions such as ``column @ query``, ``column @~ pattern`` and so on.

* [optimizer] plug-in -> built-in
  It's disabled by default for now.
  We can enable it by defining ``GRN_EXPR_OPTIMIZE=yes`` environment variable or using ``expression_rewriters`` table as before.

* Enable sequential search for enough filtered case by default.
  If the current result is enough filtered, sequential search is faster than index search.
  If the current result has only 1% records of all records in a table and less than 1000 records, sequential search is used even when index search is available.

  Cullently, this optimization is applied when search by ``==``, ``>``, ``<``, ``>=``, or ``<=``.

  When a key of a table that has columns specified by the filter is ``ShortText``, you must set ``NormalizerAuto`` to normalizer of the table to apply this optimization.

  You can disable this feature by ``GRN_TABLE_SELECT_ENOUGH_FILTERED_RATIO=0.0`` environment variable.

* [load] improve error message.
  Table name is included.

* [load] add ``lock_table`` option.
  If ``--lock_table yes`` is specified, ``load`` locks the target table while updating columns and applying ``--each``.
  This option avoids ``load`` and ``delete`` conflicts but it'll reduce load performance.

* [vector_find] avoid to crash with unsupported modes

Fixes
^^^^^

* [index] fix a bug that offline index construction for text vector with ``HASH_KEY``.
  It creates index with invalid section ID.

* Fix a bug that ``--match_columns 'index[0] || index[9]'`` uses wrong section.

* [highlighter] fix a wrong highlight bug
  It's caused when lexicon is hash table and keyword is less than N of N-gram.

* [mruby] fix a bug that real error is hidden.
  mruby doesn't support error propagation by no argument raise.
  https://github.com/mruby/mruby/issues/290

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenNgram loose]: fix a not found bug when query has only loose types.
  ``highlight_html()`` with lexicon was also broken.

* Fix a bug that text->number cast ignores trailing garbage.
  "0garbage" should be cast error.

* Fix an optimization bug for ``reference_column >= 'key_value'`` case

.. _release-8-0-5:

Release 8.0.5 - 2018-07-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/grn_expr/script_syntax`] Added complementary explain about similar search against Japanese documents.
  [GitHub#858][Patch by Yasuhiro Horimoto]

* [:doc:`/reference/functions/time_classify_day_of_week`] Added a new API: ``time_classify_day_of_week()``.

* Suppressed a warning with ``-fstack-protector``.
  Suggested by OBATA Akio.

* Added a new API: ``time_format_iso8601()``.

* Exported a struct ``grn_raw_string``.

* Added a new API: ``grn_obj_clear_option_values()``.
  It allows you to clear option values on remove (for persistent) / close (for temporary.)

* [log] Reported index column name for error message ``[ii][update][one]``.

* [httpd] Updated bundled nginx to 1.15.2.

* [:doc:`/install/ubuntu`] Dropped Ubuntu 17.10 (Artful Aardvark) support.
  It has reached EOL at July 19, 2018.

* [:doc:`/install/debian`] Dropped jessie support.
  Debian's security and release team will no longer produce updates for jessie.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed returning wrong result after unfinished ``/d/load`` data by POST.

* Fixed wrong function call around KyTea.

* [:doc:`/reference/executables/grndb`] Added a missing label for the ``--force-truncate`` option.

* Fixed crash on closing of a database, when a normalizer provided by a plugin (ex. ``groonga-normalizer-mysql``) is used with any option.

* Fixed a bug that normalizer/tokenizer options may be ignored.
  It's occurred when the same object ID is reused.

.. _release-8-0-4:

Release 8.0.4 - 2018-06-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [log] Add sub error for error message ``[ii][update][one]``.

* Added a new API: ``grn_highlighter_clear_keywords()``.

* Added a new predicate: ``grn_obj_is_number_family_bulk()``.

* Added a new API: ``grn_plugin_proc_get_value_mode()``.

* [:doc:`reference/functions/vector_find`] Added a new function ``vector_find()``.

* Suppress memcpy warnings in msgpack.

* Updated mruby from 1.0.0 to 1.4.1.

* [doc][:doc:`/reference/api/grn_obj`] Added API reference for ``grn_obj_is_index_column()``.

* [windows] Suppress printf format warnings.

* [windows] Suppress warning by msgpack.

* [:doc:`/reference/api/grn_obj`][:doc:`/reference/api/plugin`] Added encoding converter.
  rules:

  * grn_ctx::errbuf: grn_encoding

  * grn_logger_put: grn_encoding

  * mruby: UTF-8

  * path: locale

* [mrb] Added ``LocaleOutput``.

* [windows] Supported converting image path to grn_encoding.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenMecab] Convert error message encoding.

* [:doc:`/reference/window_functions/window_sum`] Supported dynamic column as a target column.

* [doc][:doc:`/reference/api/grn_obj`] Added API reference for ``grn_obj_is_vector_column()``.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/column_create`] Added more validations.

  * 1: Full text search index for vector column must have ``WITH_SECTION`` flag.
    (Note that TokenDelmit with ``WITH_POSITION`` without ``WITH_SECTION`` is permitted.
    It's useful pattern for tag search.)

  * 2: Full text search index for vector column must not be multi column index.
    detail: https://github.com/groonga/groonga/commit/08e2456ba35407e3d5172f71a0200fac2a770142

* [:doc:`/reference/executables/grndb`] Disabled log check temporarily.
  Because it's not completed yet.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [:doc:`reference/functions/sub_filter`] Fixed too much score with a too filtered case.

* Fixed build error if KyTea is installed.

* [:doc:`/reference/executables/grndb`] Fixed output channel.

* [query-log][show-condition] Maybe fixed a crash bug.

* [highlighter][lexicon] Fixed a not highlighted bug.
  The keyword wasn't highlighted if keyword length is less than N ("N"-gram.
  In many cases, it's Bigram so "less than 2").

* [windows] Fixed a base path detection bug.
  If system locale DLL path includes 0x5c (``\`` in ASCII) such as "U+8868
  CJK UNIFIED IDEOGRAPH-8868" in CP932, the base path detection is buggy.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`][TokenNgram] Fixed wrong first character length.
  It's caused for "PARENTHESIZED IDEOGRAPH" characters such as
  "U+3231 PARENTHESIZED IDEOGRAPH STOCK".

.. _release-8-0-3:

Release 8.0.3 - 2018-05-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/functions/highlight_html`] Support highlight of results of
  the search by ``NormalizerNFKC100`` or ``TokenNgram``.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`] Added new option for ``TokenNgram`` that
  ``report_source_location option`` .
  This option used when highlighting with ``highlight_html`` use a lexicon.

* [:doc:`/reference/normalizers`] Added new option for ``NormalizerNFKC100`` that
  ``unify_middle_dot option``.
  This option normalizes middle dot. You can search with or without ``・``
  (middle dot) and regardless of ``・`` position.

* [:doc:`/reference/normalizers`] Added new option for ``NormalizerNFKC100`` that
  ``unify_katakana_v_sounds option``.
  This option normalizes ``ヴァヴィヴヴェヴォ`` (katakana) to ``バビブベボ`` (katakana).
  For example, you can search ``バイオリン`` (violin) in ``ヴァイオリン`` (violin).

* [:doc:`/reference/normalizers`] Added new option for ``NormalizerNFKC100`` that
  ``unify_katakana_bu_sound option``.
  This option normalizes ``ヴァヴィヴゥヴェヴォ`` (katakana) to ``ブ`` (katakana).
  For example, you can search ``セーブル`` (katakana) and ``セーヴル`` in
  ``セーヴェル`` (katakana).

* [:doc:`reference/functions/sub_filter`] Supported ``sub_filter`` optimization
  for the too filter case.
  this optimize is valid when records are enough narrowed down before
  ``sub_filter`` execution as below.

* [:doc:`/reference/executables/groonga-httpd`] Made all workers context address
  to unique.
  context address is ``#{ID}`` of below query log.

  | #{TIME_STAMP}|#{MESSAGE}
  | #{TIME_STAMP}|#{ID}|>#{QUERY}
  | #{TIME_STAMP}|#{ID}|:#{ELAPSED_TIME} #{PROGRESS}
  | #{TIME_STAMP}|#{ID}|<#{ELAPSED_TIME} #{RETURN_CODE}

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/delete`] Added new options that ``limit``.
  You can limit the number of delete records as below example.
  ``delete --table Users --filter '_key @^ "b"' --limit 4``

* [httpd] Updated bundled nginx to 1.14.0.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/logical_select`] Fixed memory leak when an error occurs
  in filtered dynamic columns.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/logical_count`] Fixed memory leak on initial dynamic
  column error.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/logical_range_filter`] Fixed memory leak when an error
  occurs in dynamic column evaluation.

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`] Fixed a bug that the wrong ``source_offset`` when a
  loose tokenizing such as ``loose_symbol`` option.

* [:doc:`/reference/normalizers`] Fixed a bug that FULLWIDTH LATIN CAPITAL LETTERs
  such as ``U+FF21 FULLWIDTH LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A`` aren't normalized to LATIN SMALL
  LETTERs such as ``U+0061 LATIN SMALL LETTER A``.
  If you have been used ``NormalizerNFKC100`` , you must recreate your indexes.

.. _release-8-0-2:

Release 8.0.2 - 2018-04-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/executables/grndb`][:ref:`grndb-force-truncate`] Improved
  ``grndb recover --force-truncate`` option that it can be truncated even if
  locks are left on the table.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/logical_range_filter`] Added ``sort_keys`` option.

* Added a new function ``time_format()``.
  You can specify time format against a column of ``Time`` type.
  You can specify with use format of ``strftime`` .

* [:doc:`/reference/tokenizers`] Support new tokenizer ``TokenNgram``.
  You can change its behavior dynamically via options.
  Here is a list of available options:

    * ``n`` : "N" of Ngram. For example, "3" for trigram.
    * ``loose_symbol`` : Tokenize keywords including symbols, to be searched
      by both queries with/without symbols. For example, a keyword
      "090-1111-2222" will be found by any of "09011112222", "090", "1111",
      "2222" and "090-1111-2222".
    * ``loose_blank`` : Tokenize keywords including blanks, to be searched
      by both queries with/without blanks. For example, a keyword
      "090 1111 2222" will be found by any of "09011112222", "090", "1111",
      "2222" and "090 1111 2222".
    * ``remove_blank`` : Tokenize keywords including blanks, to be searched
      by queries without blanks. For example, a keyword "090 1111 2222" will
      be found by any of "09011112222", "090", "1111" or "2222". Note that
      the keyword won't be found by a query including blanks like
      "090 1111 2222".

* [:doc:`/reference/normalizers`] Support new normalizer "NormalizerNFKC100" based on Unicode NFKC (Normalization Form Compatibility Composition) for Unicode 10.0.

* [:doc:`/reference/normalizers`] Support options for "NormalizerNFKC51" and "NormalizerNFKC100" normalizers.
  You can change their behavior dynamically.
  Here is a list of available options:

    * ``unify_kana`` : Same pronounced characters in all of full-width
      Hiragana, full-width Katakana and half-width Katakana are regarded as
      the same character.
    * ``unify_kana_case`` : Large and small versions of same letters in all of
      full-width Hiragana, full-width Katakana and half-width Katakana are
      regarded as the same character.
    * ``unify_kana_voiced_sound_mark`` : Letters with/without voiced sound
      mark and semi voiced sound mark in all of full-width Hiragana,
      full-width Katakana and half-width Katakana are regarded as the same
      character.
    * ``unify_hyphen`` : The characters like hyphen are regarded as the hyphen.
    * ``unify_prolonged_sound_mark`` : The characters like prolonged sound mark
      are regarded as the prolonged sound mark.
    * ``unify_hyphen_and_prolonged_sound_mark`` : The characters like hyphen
      and prolonged sound mark are regarded as the hyphen.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/dump`] Support output of tokenizer's options and
  normalizer's options. Groonga 8.0.1 and earlier versions cannot import dump
  including options for tokenizers or normalizers generated by Groonga 8.0.2
  or later, and it will occurs error due to unsupported information.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/schema`] Support output of tokenizer's options and
  normalizer's options. Groonga 8.0.1 and earlier versions cannot import schema
  including options for tokenizers or normalizers generated by Groonga 8.0.2
  or later, and it will occurs error due to unsupported information.

* Supported Ubuntu 18.04 (Bionic Beaver)

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a bug that unexpected record is matched with space only query.
  [groonga-dev,04609][Reported by satouyuzh]

* Fixed a bug that wrong scorer may be used.
  It's caused when multiple scorers are used as below.
  ``--match_columns 'title || scorer_tf_at_most(content, 2.0)'``.

* Fixed a bug that it may also take so much time to change "thread_limit".

Thanks
^^^^^^

* satouyuzh

.. _release-8-0-1:

Release 8.0.1 - 2018-03-29
--------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/log`] Show ``filter`` conditions in query log.
  It's disabled by default. To enable it, you need to set an environment
  variable ``GRN_QUERY_LOG_SHOW_CONDITION=yes``.

* Install ``*.pdb`` into the directory where ``*.dll`` and ``*.exe``
  are installed.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/logical_count`] Support ``filtered``
  stage dynamic columns.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/logical_count`]
  [:ref:`logical-count-post-filter`] Added a new filter timing.
  It's executed after ``filtered`` stage columns are generated.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/logical_select`]
  [:ref:`logical-select-post-filter`] Added a new filter timing.
  It's executed after ``filtered`` stage columns are generated.

* Support LZ4/Zstd/zlib compression for vector data.

* Support alias to accessor such as ``_key``.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/logical_range_filter`] Optimize
  window function for large result set.
  If we find enough matched records, we don't apply window function
  to the remaining windows.

  TODO: Disable this optimization for small result set if its overhead
  is not negligible. The overhead is not evaluated yet.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/select`] Added ``match_escalation`` parameter.
  You can force to enable match escalation by ``--match_escalation yes``.
  It's stronger than ``--match_escalation_threshold 99999....999``
  because ``--match_escalation yes`` also works with
  ``SOME_CONDITIONS && column @ 'query'``.
  ``--match_escalation_threshold`` isn't used in this case.

  The default is ``--match_escalation auto``. It doesn't change the
  current behavior.

  You can disable match escalation by ``--match_escalation no``.
  It's the same as ``--match_escalation_threshold -1``.

* [httpd] Updated bundled nginx to 1.13.10.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed memory leak that occurs when a prefix query doesn't match any token.
  [GitHub#820][Patch by Naoya Murakami]

* Fixed a bug that a cache for different databases is used when
  multiple databases are opened in the same process.

* Fixed a bug that a wrong index is constructed.
  This occurs only when the source of a column is a vector column and
  ``WITH_SECTION`` isn't specified.

* Fixed a bug that a constant value can overflow or underflow in
  comparison (>,>=,<,<=,==,!=).

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Naoya Murakami

.. _release-8-0-0:

Release 8.0.0 - 2018-02-09
--------------------------

This is a major version up! But It keeps backward compatibility.
You can upgrade to 8.0.0 without rebuilding database.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/select`] Added ``--drilldown_adjuster`` and
  ``--drilldowns[LABEL].adjuster``.
  You can adjust score against result of drilldown.

* [:ref:`online-index-construction`] Changed environment variable name
  ``GRN_II_REDUCE_EXPIRE_ENABLE`` to ``GRN_II_REDUCE_EXPIRE_THRESHOLD``.

  ``GRN_II_REDUCE_EXPIRE_THRESHOLD=0 == GRN_II_REDUCE_EXPIRE_ENABLE=no``.
  ``GRN_II_REDUCE_EXPIRE_THRESHOLD=-1`` uses
  ``ii->chunk->max_map_seg / 2`` as threshold.
  ``GRN_II_REDUCE_EXPIRE_THRESHOLD > 0`` uses
  ``MIN(ii->chunk->max_map_seg / 2, GRN_II_REDUCE_EXPIRE_THRESHOLD)``
  as threshold.
  ``GRN_II_REDUCE_EXPIRE_THRESHOLD=32`` is the default.

* [:doc:`/reference/functions/between`] Accept ``between()`` without borders.
  If the number of arguments passed to ``between()`` is 3, the 2nd and 3rd
  arguments are handled as the inclusive edges. [GitHub#685]

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a memory leak for normal hash table.
  [GitHub:mroonga/mroonga#190][Reported by fuku1]

* Fix a memory leak for normal array.

* [:doc:`/reference/commands/select`] Stopped to cache when ``output_columns``
  uses not stable function.

* [Windows] Fixed wrong value report on ``WSASend`` error.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* fuku1
