.. -*- rst -*-

Introduction
============

This documentation describes about how to write, generate and manage
Groonga documentation.

Install depended software
-------------------------

Groonga uses Sphinx_ as documentation tool.

.. _Sphinx: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/

Here are command lines to install Sphinx.

Debian GNU/Linux, Ubuntu::

  % sudo apt-get install -V -y python3-pip gettext
  % sudo pip install -r doc/requirements.txt
  % (cd doc && bundle install)

CentOS, Fedora::

  % sudo yum install -y python-pip gettext
  % sudo pip install -r doc/requirements.txt
  % (cd doc && bundle install)

OS X::

  % brew install python
  % brew install gettext
  % export PATH=`brew --prefix gettext`/bin:$PATH
  % pip install -r doc/requirements.txt
  % (cd doc && bundle install)

Run ``cmake`` with ``--preset=doc``
-----------------------------------

Groonga disables documentation generation by default. You need to
enable it explicitly by adding ``--preset=doc`` option to
``cmake``::

  % cmake -S . -B ../groonga.doc --preset=doc

Now, your Groonga build is documentation ready.

Generate HTML
-------------

You can generate HTML by the following command::

  % cmake --build ../groonga.doc

You can find generated HTML documentation at ``../groonga.doc/doc/en/html/``.

Update
------

You can find sources of documentation at ``doc/source/``. The sources should be written in English.
Please edit these sources under ``doc/source/`` if you want to update Groonda documentation.
Your changes will be reflected to ``.po`` files, and updated HTML will be generated by the following command:

.. code-block:: console

   % cmake --build ../groonga.doc
   % firefox ../groonga.doc/doc/en/html/*.html

Also, see :doc:`i18n` about how to translate documentation.
